---
title: Quines
layout: post
collections: workflow
---

There is little software that I still use 5 years later. Usually, something new comes along within a couple of years, and I don't stick with the software by choice. 10 years later? Almost unheard of. 20 years later?.... impossible! Nothing works 20 years later unless... you are an html quine.

## Why TiddlyWiki?

For those that are not familiar, [TiddlyWiki](https://tiddlywiki.com/) is a "non-linear notebook", which means it is essentially sticky notes on steroids. It was the digital [Zettelkasten](https://zettelkasten.de) before they became cool. Most interestingly, though, is that *<gasp>* files created in 2007 still work today!

## TiddlyWiki's Approach to Tech

So much of the tech in our lives revolves around one thing: lock-in. That is to say: to keep you stuck with their product, giving it as much eyeball time as they can get. This is notably different than what it should be: to provide the most useful tools to make things in life easier, more efficient, more effective. Some might argue that these two are one and the same: if people are spending a lot of time on a particular piece of software, it must be because it meets this definition of being a tool. But there-in lies the rub: tech companies are VERY good at human psychology, including your best and worst instincts. More time on a product != more value, no matter what they would have you think.

TiddlyWiki, and many other open source tools, take a different approach. This approach is, arguably, much more in line with the ideal that tech === valuable tool. Mostly, what makes them different is the lack of a capitalistic incentive. Not that there is inherently anything wrong with making money off of software (although I do take issue with the subscription model for most forms of software, save those that do have a constant underlying cost in the form of compute or **real** services). It is, instead, that it lives or dies by its actual utility to users, and continued relevance.

Enter: TiddlyWiki.

### The Unappreciated, Standalone HTML+JavaScript+CSS ("CHava") File

TiddlyWiki is many things, but the one aspect that interests me the most is the software architecture approach when you first download it - the flat, standalone CHava file. One of the things that makes it interesting is: the software product is the flat file itself. This makes 1 thing abundantly clear - you can't really enforce any kind of payment model in that scenario, as it is infinitely copy-able. You could attempt to use the 1990s license key model, back when software was sold on floppies or CD-ROMs, but as any good millennial knows - that model was never really enforceable.

CHava files have several inherent qualities that make them more useful than, say, downloading a PDF or Word document:

- There is absolutely no additional software required that your device won't already have, it only requires a browser to use[^1]
- You can leverage the full capabilities of HTML, CSS and JavaScript, which provide most functionality you will likely ever need (just look at the web today and the apps you use)
- It is essentially future-proof, or as close as you can get, in the world of tech. The only thing potentially more future proof being plain text files
- And something I've recently discovered... CHava is actually the perfect format for vibe coding, because it requires zero additional software to run, and it can all be tested in the same window in which you are chatting

### The Challenges of CHava Files

Despite all of these benefits, there are good reasons that most people (see: virtually nobody) builds software as CHava files:

- It's almost impossible to make money off of building CHava software alone due to its structure. It can only ever be just a tool - hence why we like it for our purposes here
- There are some real limits to the size browsers allow and can load for a single file, causing complications when you need to load a lot of information at once (outside most use cases)
- And probably the biggest sticker: saving state while still keeping to the CHava file structure, meaning - you have to be able to save state to a file.

It's this last issue that we will spend the most time thinking about, as in our opinion it is the biggest blocker to adoption of CHava files.

### CHava and State Saving

There are only a couple of ways we can save a CHava file, and if we are being honest - there is only one way in which maintains the spirit of CHava. This also happens to be the default mode for TiddlyWiki, which we referenced above. That is: a "default saver" mode, meaning using the browser's default ability to download a file, something every credible browser allows you to do. This, unfortunately, comes with some serious limitations due to some very real security concerns on the browser's part:

1. You are beholden to how your browser downloads files. This usually means:
	- By default, your `Downloads` folder, which you are unlikely to want to change just for the purposes of one specific workflow
	- Unless you install a plugin, you can't overwrite existing file names, resulting in things like `(1) my_file.html`, `(2) my_file.html`, and `(1) (1) my_file.html` (yes this can happen when you open a previously downloaded file and don't go through the bother of renaming it)
	- Based on this download model, you can't store things in sub-folders, since every save will be pushed to the same downloads location (unless you manually intervene)
	- You can't easily reference multiple files as browsers restrict what local files can be loaded (usually only things like images or, sometimes, PDF files)
2. You can't effectively link to most external files, which means - you usually end up putting everything in one file... which can get very large.
	- There are some exceptions depending on the security settings of your browser. Most of the time, image files like png and jpeg are loadable from an external reference.
	- This is a problem though when you need




[^1]: Note that certain browsers, especially on mobile devices, can limit the use of JavaScript - some removing it from running altogether. This is why having two modes for a CHava file (HTML read-only | Fully functional) is usually preferred. This ensures that no matter what device you are viewing it on, the file will load.

